From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes,
our weekly discussion with web
developer and technologists, Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number three Oh three recorded
live Thursday, January 26th, 2012. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
Telerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode,
Scott talks with Kimberly Bryant about
improving diversity in technology. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes. And today we've got
Kimberly Bryant from black girls code.
Thank you, Kimberly, for taking
the time to chat with
me today. Thank you, Scott,
for having me on the
show. I appreciate it. No
worries. So I usually talk
about, you know, technology and
programming languages, and haven't really
talked too much about social
issues around technology. I did
have a couple of shows
over the last 300, like
I did women in technology
in the Muslim world. And
that was very interesting because
we learned that what we
thought was true. Wasn't true.
And what I wanted to
do is talk to you
and understand why someone who
is a programmer who's maybe
listening to this show should
care whether or not more
black girls code. I think
that's a, that's a fair
question. I think the reason
that someone in technology, who's
not a woman or not
a person of color should
care because the field of
customers that we serve in
terms of who actually are
the consumers of these products
that we're developing from the
it side is a very
diverse one. It's very female
oriented, and it's also very
demographically oriented to folks of
color and is very diverse.
So I think the more
unique and different perspectives that
come to the table on
the design side, the more
effective and the more efficient
the products that we deliver
will be in terms of
meeting the needs of the
folks that we're building for.
So I think even with
empirical studies have been shown
that teams that are more
diverse are actually more efficient
as well. So, you know,
for all of those reasons,
I think that we should
care to make the environment
and the working environment, the
creative environment on the it
side is the versus possible.
That's interesting that should the,
should the environment in the
work environment reflect the environment
of the public. I mean,
right now in America, black
folks are about 14% of
the population. So where we,
we're not looking to have
teams be, You know, half
black, half white or, you
know, some arbitrary amount of
diversity. What, what is a
reasonable amount of diversity and
is that amount, the amount
that is available in the
general public? I think that
from my perspective, now, this
is just my own personal
perspective. I think that it
absolutely should be reflective of
the population in general, but
I think we need to
look beyond the population saying
that we need to look
beyond the population within the
continental us, because while folks
of color, only 14% in
the United States, that's not the
case. If you look on
a worldwide basis, the, the
world is much more diverse
than that. And even here
in the U S you
know, the, it has been
shown from the data that's
been collected lately that within
the next decade and a
half, that those numbers will
be much different than what
they are now. So there,
there will actually be much
more of a diverse population
than what we're seeing at
the numbers currently today. That
will be a lot, you
know, that will be a
lot of Hispanics that will
make up that demographic. And
I think when you look
at Hispanics and I see
the numbers skew even worse
than African Americans, so that
is an issue. So one
of the things we address
in our program is not
just girls of African American
descent, but also girls that
are Latino, native American as
well, because those are also
groups that are currently underrepresented
in it. Do you, do
you think that this, the
problem of homogeny within technology
started 20, 30, 40 years
ago, and this is an
issue of, of education and
availability of technology? I do.
I absolutely do. And even
if you look from a
CML perspective, I just recently
did a presentation that show
back many, many years ago,
during the thirties and forties,
there were many women that
were working on some of
the very first installations and
installments and working on a
lot of the supercomputers, but
that number started to change
drastically from the sixties and
seventies. And in the eighties,
we had a bit of
a peak that was during
my time when I was
in college, as far as
women still, not so much
as far as African Americans
or minorities. So we had
a bit of a peak
and CS enrollment in college
at around the 80 mid
eighties, and then a drastic
drop. So it has been
sort of a roller coaster
ride, but the, I think
in terms of when we
went into the web to
low era, and even before
that the numbers and the,
in the domination of males
in the industry really started
to push a lot of
the females out of the
field and African Americans and
folks of color never really
got a foothold into the
field. So it's a double
entendre when you're a person
of color and also a
woman in this field, there
are just not many folks
trailblazers before us, or even
those that are there now
for us to pattern ourselves
after. Yeah, there definitely were
some very significant women in
computers in the sixties and
seventies. And that kind of
did take a little bit
of a dive there. I
mean, initially you had like
Grace Hopper who developed COBOL, you
know, that, that is interesting,
that things that happen during
the late sixties and seventies
kind of changed the environment,
changed the structure of where
people went to school, changed
things that were available to
them to, to speak specifically
about the programs that are
available. Like, for example, in
Atlanta, there's three historically black
colleges in Atlanta, but only
one has a computer science
department for something like that.
Aren't they to blame, aren't
the historically black colleges to
blame for that. They should
have a computer science department,
they should be making sure
that those programs are available
to people. I would agree,
but I don't think that,
you know, coming from an
engineer, a traditional engineering background
myself, I just think that
as a person of color,
I think you have to
look a little deeper. So
African Americans in this country
have always been positioned for,
to be successful in society.
You either go one of
three routes. You either become
a doctor, you become a
lawyer, or really that's really
the path for most folks
coming out of the era,
the civil rights movement, et
cetera. We were at doctors,
lawyers, or teachers, educators, and
that was the path to
success. So there really, wasn't
a clear indication for us
to go on a tech
now, knowledge, you feel there
were some but not a
lot. So that's always been
the thing. And for far
as African Americans in our
culture, the symbol of success
is becoming the one person
that becomes the lawyer or
the doctor, or even the
educator beforehand. And now so
much now so much has
changed in our society that
kids actually look at more
of the folks on the
entertainment and sports side. There's
those people that had no
sales after. So our colleges
are African it's. Historically black
colleges actually were kind of
raised and born in that
era. And that is what
they cater to the liberal
arts education. You know, the
doctors, the lawyers and the
educators that's who they train.
So yes, they can probably
do more to address the
STEM careers that are, that
really we need to focus
on now, but you kind
of need to look a
little big, deeper into historical
context of why it is
what it is now, and
many of our HBCU. And
there are some that have
programs in CS, but they're
not alive, but I don't
think that's any different. When
you look overall at the,
the college and the colleges
in the U S as
a whole, there's a huge
skew towards liberal arts education,
which does need to change
for us to move, you
know, the country in the
direction we need to go.
So a couple of acronyms,
just for the listeners who
may not be familiar with
them, STEM is a word
that you keep saying, science,
technology, engineering, and math, and
then HBCU, historically black colleges
and universities. So when we
talk about, about STEM and
the push towards STEM, we're
talking about making sure that
everyone has the opportunity to
have a science, technology, engineering
and math, math classes, available
programs available to them. Why
are those programs not available
in as much in places
where black folks go to
school at the edge at
the elementary and the high
school level? I think it's
the demand. So there's not
been a huge demand. On
one hand from students at
some of the HBC use
to go into these fields
of study, there was needs
to change. So when I
was going to college, I
think colleges, myself, I did
look at SPC use and
the, I guess the most
prominent one would have been
Howard university, which did have
a robust engineering program, but
not a lot of the
HBCU did. So I ended
up going to a college
that was not an HBCU
because I really wanted to
get a strong foundation in
engineering, but I was a
handful of black students that
entered the freshmen classes and
engineer. So the demand is
not, and has not really
been there on a heavy
emphasis and focus for STEM
careers for students of color.
And that starts even before
they they're getting ready to
look into high school, which
is why, you know, in
my program, I really start
working with girls much earlier
than high school. Even we
started in elementary and middle
school because that's when your
focus really starts to frame
itself around what you are
interested in and what things
you may choose once you
go to college. So we
have to get students of
color interested in STEM careers
and see us way before
they are ready to select
the college. And I think
once that demand is there,
we will see more colleges
that are really catering to
that student demographics. So I
think that that gets getting,
getting back to the, the
children. I think moving away
from the discussion about colleges,
university, you're saying that the
man's not there, the demand
is likely not there because
the young people who have
grown up to be in
their twenties don't have the,
the context or the interest.
And they look at these
careers and they say, yeah,
that's for nerds. That's, you
know, it's a bunch of
white men that are, you
know, doing their computer science
thing, but that's just not
for me. And like you
said, that the HBC use
that are kind of born
out of the civil rights
era are set up for
liberal arts for making doctors
and lawyers for social people,
interested in social change, making
educators. But the idea that
I could be an engineer
and build something and make
change that way, isn't indoctrinated
into the kids that are
really really early age. At
what age do you think
young, black girls, or just
young people of color decide
that programming's for nerds and
they just give up their,
their, their, they switch it
off in their mind. I
believe absolutely starts for girls
at least in middle school.
And I would, I don't
know if I would necessarily
change that for children of
color, but for girls in
general, it definitely is middle
school. That's key. So that's
why one of the focuses
of our program is to
really have lots of programs
that really attach girls during
that phase and middle school
where they're in a transition.
And if you look at
even the statistics and math
and science girls track had
to have with boys until
about middle school, and that's
when they start to you
start to see differences in
the achievement levels. And I
think that's for a number
of reasons, but I know
myself as a young person
that, you know, went through
the same transition. That's about
the time where you're not
really sure there's a lot
of social issues that you're
going through through that development
stage. And if girls then
are not given that encouragement
and support that they can
actually do some of this
more technical work, and it's
not something that's not cool,
then they want the opt
out. So once that drops
starts to happen in middle
school, it is very rare
to see girls to continue
and then pick back up
into the science and math
and technical fields into high
school. You have to address
it in middle school because
that's when they start to
build those connections in terms
of what makes sense for
them and where they fit
in. Right? And they, they
need to have a healthy
sense of self esteem just
about themselves. Not necessarily about
themselves as women or about
themselves, people of color, but
they just simply, as a
person wandering around in America,
they need to know that
they're okay and what they
choose to do and look
like and feel like, and
work on is okay. And
that brings up an interesting
question. We had a comment
on, on Google plus and
a couple of comments on
Twitter and someone made the
comment that it isn't just
people of color there are.
And this was the gentleman's
term redneck schools where computer
science isn't cool either. I
mean, a poor white school
is not necessarily going to
promote engineering as a, a
way out as well. So
this idea that the social
fabric within which the students
operate may not be set
up to allow them to
go and have these pursuits
without being teased and constantly
berated. And at the age
of nine, 10, 11, it's
really difficult to tell your
friends, I'm interested in robots
putting together computer programs. And
at some point you're just
going to eventually give up
no matter what color you
are True. That's true. But
I think the difference is
that there, you need to
see yourself. So you need
to see a reflection of
yourself to really build that
self confidence in terms of,
you know, what your life
path will be and what
type of road that you
want to take. That that's
just what it is. You
need to see a reflection
on yourself. And I think
oftentimes children of color, you
know, boys and girls, they
don't see that when it
comes to technology. They're this,
there's not that bill Gates.
There's not the Mark Zuckerberg
that looks like me. He
came from a similar background
as me and gives me
that extra bit of self
confidence that I need to
know that even though my
friends are going to the
basketball court and I want
to sit here and build
this website, that is okay,
I could do that. And
I think that, that makes
a huge difference. So yeah,
I would agree that in
general, overall, the geek culture
is not that I guess,
appealing to a middle school
kid, even if it was
from a redneck environment, but
at least that kid can
possibly go and find a
reflection of themselves to give
them that motivation, to continue
on the path and actually
do more, to connect with
someone that could actually be
a mentor to them. And
our kids don't have that.
And that, I think that's
the biggest issue that makes
it much more relevant and
an impact to them in
terms of where they go
into technology. I think that
that's really, really that's really
well said. I think that
growing up and raising my,
my sons who are mixed
that well, a, the average
white person might not say,
Oh yeah, you know, we
have a, a mixed president
now that's great, you know,
progress. It cannot be overstated
that just the simple existence
of a person in power
that happens to look like
a young person, how that
changes a young person's perspective.
I mean, I've got, I've
got three year old and
five-year-old that are growing up
in a world where, you
know, there are a couple
of world leaders that happen
to look like them, and
that's going to be a
given and well, you know,
again, someone might say, Oh,
you know, whatever, why are
you putting so much? Why
are you putting so much,
I'm honest on that. Why
is that such a big
deal? But the idea that
Obama and other world leaders
of color are in the
public consciousness will mean that
a nine year old version
of my son will go,
yeah, I could, I could
be president. I could totally
do that right there. You
know, that just is a
given. So I like the
idea of really exposing kids
to people who look like
them early, early on. I
assume that, you know, if
I show up at a
young school full of young
black girls and try to
teach them that might be
a value, but it's not
nearly as of much value,
if someone shows up that
happens to look like them
and came from their neighborhood
and, and came up the
way that they came. Absolutely.
I think for, for our
program, one of the things
that's been a huge benefit
is that we had a
tremendous outpouring of folks that
stepped in to be volunteers.
Most of them, I would
say 99.9% of them were
software engineers, or either designers
in the Valley, in the
Bay area. And I would
say over 90% of them
were women. Not that we
set, we put out anything
that, Oh, we only want
women volunteers, but women volunteers
overwhelmingly, came and volunteered their
time in our program. And
that was huge because that
allowed, you know, our girls
to work side by side,
you know, six weeks at
a time with a female
engineer, which is something and
most of their neighborhoods, they
won't see every day. So,
you know, even that little
bit beyond the tool that
we were teaching, that that's
huge because that plants a
seed that although I may
want to be an actress,
or I may want to
be a police officer may
want to be a lawyer.
I actually could have this
career over here as a
software engineer as an option
because I met this person
during this class and this
person was cool. And I
liked that. So we just
want to plant those seeds.
So there are options. So
the girls see options for
themselves where they may not
have seen them before. Exactly.
Exactly. I had an interesting
question on Twitter from a
white gentleman in the UK
who said, well, I don't
understand why you're trying to
artificially change kind of the
way that things have naturally
turned out. Why do we
want to kind of stack
the deck in one direction?
But then an interesting comment
on Google plus came in
from Michelle Hatley, from uplift
to DC. And she's an
African American computer scientist and
engineer who works in a
similar program that makes sure
that kids are exposed and
she points out. And I
like this, that the word
exposure is so fundamental. You're
not necessarily trying to stack
the deck or give anyone
an opportunity that anyone else
didn't get. You are simply
trying to expose kids because
with exposure, students get interest.
If they don't get exposed,
they don't even know the
topic exists. Absolutely. And that,
that, that is the key
word right there. The exposure
and that that's spot on
because when we started our
pilot program in 2011, we
had actually went to community
centers and the baby's honors
one in San Francisco. We
talked to some of the
guidance counselors and principals at
the middle school. And we
had girls and their parents
come in and have a
introduction to the program. Most
of the girls did not
know what computer science was.
They did not know what
computer programming was. They had
no clue, maybe one or
two girls out of the
whole program had done anything
similar before. So a lot
of the girls, I had
to kind of convince, well,
you know, you, you should
come to the class, try
it out. It'll be fun.
They didn't know. They didn't
have a clue. But at
the end of the six
session, we had all of
these girls interested and had
already created things of their
own and there's program called
scratch. And that just plants
the seed. So I may
or may not be able
to burst a Mark circle
bird out of this class,
but maybe I will. But
the point is not even
that, that's not the goal.
The goal is just like
I said, and just what
Michelle said. We want to
expose kids to opportunities where
they may not necessarily see
them. I think we take
it for granted living in
the Bay area. We're surrounded
by technology. We're surrounded by
innovation, but most of the
kids from the inner city
do not have a clue
that it exists when it's
right in their backyard. So
that's the point of the
program that really give kids
an opportunity to be exposed
to a field of study,
that they may not even
know that they have an
interest in until we show
it to them. So you
bring up an interesting point,
the idea that technology is
all around us and what
we take for granted, but
it's interesting. And I think
useful to point out that
black people, at least in
America use social media more,
more often, arguably more effectively
than white folks, black people
dominate Twitter. Lot of people
are using smartphones much more
than white people. These districts
statistics are all kind of
not in dispute. An interesting
question from a young lady
on Twitter says has the
proliferation of smartphones and the
exist, the idea that almost
everyone has a computer in
their pocket, they just don't
know it's a computer. Is
that proliferation of smartphones resulted
in more girls being interested.
The idea that I can
make something and put it
on this device that I
carry around with me all
day long. Unfortunately I would
have to say no, because
even though we as African
Americans and even as some
of the girls and students
are heavy users of technology
or heavy consumers of it,
they don't understand yet, which
is the purpose of the
program. Again, that there's something
beneath just the youth. So
there's something beneath that that
actually makes it easy. But
there's something beneath my Android
phone that actually I can
actually create an application and
not just download one from
the store, the app store,
they don't understand the piece
beyond that. So that even
though they're using technology heavily,
they don't understand that the
other side of it about
the creation and how they
can be a builder using
this technology shields. That's the
point to actually show them
that gets them to kind
of pull back the top
layer and look on these.
That's a really, it sounds
I, as an adult hearing
that you kind of say,
how could they not know
that? But my, my six
year old, we said, you
know, eat your chicken. And
he says, chicken, what? Chicken?
This is meat. And then
suddenly just, he clicks. And
then you can almost see
his entire world explode and
suddenly the entire kind of
like inventory chain from chicken
to on your plate, just
poofed in his head. And
he said, wait a second,
chickens turn into food. And
then, you know, Oh my
goodness. So we took him
to a farm and explained
the whole process. But from
his point of view, Hey,
meet magically shows up on
my plate. And then his
eyes were opened. What seems
like an obvious thing? Where
did these things come from?
This same thing applies to
smartphones. You know, I downloaded
it from the app store.
That's just, it's just me.
Right? A second. Where did
it come from? I have
no idea. You mean a
person built a business around
this and it is exposure.
Isn't it? You've got to
let them know where these
things come from, take them
to factories, take them to
software companies, bring your girls
to Workday and stuff like
that. Interesting. Interesting. And are
you doing like mentorship, your
program? How, how does this
is structured right now? Is
there a mentorship component? You,
you find kids that you
look like this one's going
to really be somebody and
you pull them aside and
assign them a mentor from
the community directly, or what's
the program structured. We actually
don't do that. We really
want the program to be
as open and accessible as
possible. So we do have
an application process when we
have our programs, when we
have our sessions and we
advertise that we actually do
community outreach to community organizations
and really, really try to
tap into drill. They might
even just have a little
bit of interest in technology
and take it from there.
But we do have a
mentorship from the standpoint of
having very engaged TAs and
mentors that come in during
the sessions to work with
the girls on the programs
and lesson plans that they're
working on. And we also
try to make sure that
the program is built to
be sustainable, not just for
the organization, but also for
the girls. So we want
to take girls from having
no knowledge of computer program
at all, and really see
them continue to grow in
the programs that continue to
come and take additional classes.
So it's not a one
shot deal where they come
to one class and we
don't see them again. We
really try to build relationships
with the girls and keep
them involved and engaged in
terms of other activities. So
we're going, some of the
girls are going to hack
the future hackathon for kids
here in the Bay area.
The San Jose tech museum,
this Saturday is not sponsored
by black girls code, but
we are organizing a trip
for some of the drills
to go to that because
we want to keep them
engaged with technology, even when
they're not in our program
saying that is the goal
of our collaboration with brackets
21 to really have a
portal for our girls to
engage with other professionals in
the tech field or in
other fields that they may
be interested in so that
we continually, we continually feel.
Then they kind of see
them with information on technology,
information, on careers that can
help them grow. How, how
much has open source and
the proliferation of free software
and the ability to make,
make things for free. Like
you mentioned, squeak, and there's
all sorts of, you know,
every, every vendor from, you
know, Google, Microsoft, Apple all
has free things that you
can download. And there's lots
of open source projects where
someone could download what they
need to make a piece
of software. And the fact
that that is like now
more than ever free, does,
has that helped at all?
Do you expose them these
free tools and send them
home? Yes, yes, yes. And
yes, that is huge. You
know, most of our kids.
So I think one of
the challenges that we have
with our program is that
we actually do really target
kids that are from the
demographic areas and underrepresented areas
in the urban areas where
they may not necessarily have
access to these tools at
home. They may not have
access to broadband. They may
not actually have access to
computer equipment to do these
things, but if they do,
and it definitely, when they
come to the class, being
able to, you know, use
free to open source tools
like scratch to like Alice,
there's just so much available.
Now that's key to us
being able to really get
them to continually tweak and
play around with technology. That's
key because if we didn't
have that open source ability,
we would not be able
to reach the kids that
we need to. Now, whenever
anyone talks about race, there's
always the dancing around about
stereotypes. So certainly any generalizations
that I may say or
not say are just that
generalizations, but amongst other people
of color like Asians, South,
South Asians, Indians, there's a
lot of support from the
parents. No one, no one
is surprised to see another
Indian software engineer or another
Asian software engineer. And one
could argue that culturally engineering
is really promoted within those
cultures, but also that the
parents are deeply involved and
being an engineer is almost
as exciting as being a
doctor. How do you get
the parents involved to the
point where they realize that,
Hey, you know, a web
startup could be a reasonable
career for my, my young
daughter or son. One of
the things that we noticed
during our program and during
our pilot last year was
that our parents were very
concerned as well as very
interested in what their daughters
were doing. And now during
that two and a half
hours on the Saturday, so
we actually had opportunities for
during the class session for
parents to come in and
the girls to present those
that actually an opportunity for
the girls to learn and
develop their self confidence in
public speaking, and being able
to present their work and
also opportunity for parents to
see what their girls were
doing in class and what
they were learning. And they
were very open to that.
We also had a career
day during the middle of
our work last workshop, where
we invited professionals to come
in and speak to the
girls about their careers and
technology and give a career
presentation. And we also invited
the parents to that. So
we want the parents to
see that this is a
path. So as much as
for us, it's about educating
our parents because they normally
are not in the technology
field, have any insight to
it as well, as much
as educating the kids. So
that has been part of,
I think, helping us to
have really good attendance in
terms of our classes. So
the parents see the value
of having their girls come
to this class on Saturdays
and learn a key skill
that could help them in
the future. So our parents
have been very engaged and
that's helpful. So I think
it's, it's, again goes back
to the issue of exposure.
It has not traditionally been
technology or even engineering for
that matter. Been a career
path that most African American
that's supposed to color from
the U S so if
you're talking about trans continental,
totally different story, but the
us, most people have asked
him to sit that has
not engineering has not traditionally
been a path that we've
grown to know the push
our kids into. So exposing
the parents to those opportunities
and see what it can
do for their kids is
as much as important to
exposing the kids for us.
And once we do that,
I have not had one
single issue with having our
parents continue to support, bring
their girls out to classes,
bring their girls out to
events like this on Saturday
at all. Very cool. So
people can learn more about
black girls code, black girls
code.com. You can donate, there's
a donate button right there.
You can get involved. And
I assume that you'd probably
encourage people to get involved
with whatever their community is.
Not necessarily black girls, but
maybe, you know, Latino guys
or whatever group the, the
audiences involved in go to
schools get involved there. I
assume that there are programs
like this in virtually every
city for every kind of
person that is underrepresented within
science of technology, You would
be surprised there actually not
as many as there should
be not at all. So
that was one of the
driving reasons for me to
create black girls code. There,
there definitely is not another
program that specifically targets girls
of color in this way,
but there are some other
programs that are more targeted
to girls. There are some
more that are targeted, just
kids of color, some Latino
kids, but they're not enough.
So I would encourage folks
to get involved in whatever
programs that they can and
even creating things in their
own neighborhoods and in their
own communities around, around their
expertise to really expose kids
to this field and to
the, the options that they
have in the field of
technology. Well, I think that
you said it, you said
it correctly and you said
it very well. And you
said there aren't enough of
these programs. Certainly not as
many as, as folks deserve.
So I encourage people who
are listening to get involved.
You can check out black
girls code. We also mentioned
uplift DC. There's other programs
like robotics in DC and
youth app lab. And we'll
try to put as many
links to those in the
show notes as we can.
And thank you so much,
Kimberly, for chatting with me
today. Thank you, Scott. I
appreciate it. And just last
thing, we have a new
class that's coming up in
collaboration with a company here
in the Bay area called
ThoughtWorks, which starts the second
week of February. And we'll
be doing a national video
STEM game challenge. So definitely
if folks are interested, please
take a look at that.
Alright, then you'll send me
all that and I'll put
that in the show notes.
So we'll be sure to
have links to everything. Definitely.
Thank you. This has been
another episode of Hansel minutes.
We'll see you again next
week.